---
title: "Book review: On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City by Alice Goffman"
date: 2023-02-21T14:14:29-05:00
author: "KristenJZ"
slug: book-review-on-the-run
draft: false
toc: true
---

{{<block class="note">}}
This book review was a course assignment in Dr. Reisdorf's 2023 Spring COMM6000: Technology and Criminal Justice.
{{<end>}}

## Introduction

This critical reflection reviews Alice Goffman’s (2014) book *On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City*. It explores the impact of mass imprisonment in the US on young Black people in a Philadelphia ghetto. The imprisonment rate rose throughout the 20th century and reached 450-680 per 100,000 people by the start of the 21st century (Garland, 2001). In the meantime, incarceration rates are racially imbalanced, with 1 in 9 Black men aged 20-34 incarcerated vs 1 in 54 for all men aged 18 and older (The Pew Center, 2008). The background of racial imbalance in incarceration rates sets the scene of the sixth block, the social setting in *On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City*. Alice Goffman, born into a well-educated family and daughter of Erving Goffman, one of the most famous sociologists of the 20th century, is a white, upper-middle-class woman entering the field of Black people and writing about their experiences. Her identity and methodology have sparked discussions. This review summarizes this popular sociological work, explores its theoretical background, and concludes with personal critical insights.

## Summary

Alice Goffman gained access to the 6th block by serving as a tutor for a local teenage girl and subsequently knew many young boys in the block. During her six-year stay, she befriended many young boys in the area. Through her observations and experiences, Dr. Goffman focused on exploring the impact of policing and incarceration on poor Black communities, specifically examining the themes of surveillance and community. 

According to Goffman's book, she couldn't help but observe that due to the prevalence of minor infractions leading to incarceration, young people grew up learning about the role of police and the lifestyle of their incarcerated fathers. This resulted in the repetition of a specific, yet unpredictable, routine to avoid police and court involvement. The routine had to be unpredictable as a predictable pattern would lead to their own detention.

The constant presence of police cameras and frequent stops, searches, and arrests by police created a pervasive surveillance network, trapping young Black men in the 6th block in a cycle of being caught and on the run. This made it difficult for them to work, study, earn a living, and build a future for themselves and their loved ones. Women in the community faced the added pressure of potentially being forced to provide information about their men to the police, risking humiliation and damaging their relationships with both the police and their male partners. This further exacerbated the already strained relationships between men and women and widened the divide between those living respectably and those caught in this cycle.

Critical theorists argued that it is possible for the subordinate to reconstruct the structure (Littlejohn et al., 2017). The residents of the 6th block possess agency as they can establish underground markets to form new connections and protect themselves. Women can also use the pressure from the police to control and integrate their husbands into family life. In this community, a new moral framework has emerged, where devotion is expressed through the refusal to inform the police of a friend's whereabouts. The power dynamic in the 6th block is a co-creation between the Black community and the police authority. 

Surveillance in the minority community in the 6th block acted as chains, straining the daily lives of both men and women. Did this surveillance actually improve the criminal justice system? Goffman (2014) argues that the answer is NO, as it resulted in the creation of additional crimes. It's important to note that the 6th block serves as a microcosm of a larger society experiencing mass incarceration, with similar experiences occurring in other communities across America.   

## Theory Tradition: **Foucault and Chicago School**

In her book, Goffman (2014) aimed for wider accessibility by limiting theoretical content. her Ph.D. work (Goffman, 2009) revealed her theoretical background in Foucault and the Chicago school.

As the daughter of sociologist Erving Goffman and with strong sociology training, Alice Goffman was predestined for a career in the field. In her article (2009), she applied Foucault's (1979) theory of power to analyze surveillance in the sixth block. Foucault (1979) argued that modern society has seen an expansion of surveillance from prisons to all aspects of life, including homes, military groups, and cities. In Goffman's (2014) work, the omnipresent cameras and police function as a panoptic prison. Goffman (2014) delved deeper into the topic of surveillance by depicting the daily lives of Black people in the sixth block as a balance between semi-legality and illegality, with subordinates resisting authority instead of self-disciplining and preserving their own moral structure. By moving the focus of surveillance research from institutions to residential areas, Goffman (2014) amplified its impact.

Urban and community studies are a key subfield of sociology for the Chicago school (Kurtz, 1984), viewing the neighborhood as a dynamic organism shaped by the interactions of its agents. In Goffman's (2014) work, these patterns include the unpredictable routines of young Black men, the pressures faced by women, and the shared moral fabric constructed by police and residents. Goffman (2014) also opens up new avenues for future community development, making her work a continuation of the Chicago school's legacy.

Examining the theoretical background of *On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City* is important, despite the author's trade-off of theory for broader accessibility. Placing the work in its sociological tradition can aid in further developing ethnographic studies.  

## Critical Thoughts

I considered conducting ethnography for minority groups but faced challenges in gaining access and the potential loss of part of my identity. I admire Goffman's bravery in participating as an observer within a different community, despite criticisms of the methodology in her book.

The section on methodological notes at the end of the book is impressive, especially the discussion on her fear of police after immersing in a group of young Black men despite having no reason to fear. While attempting to balance her white identity, she even crossed a line of legitimacy, driving Chunk to a revenge attempt. She was aware that her privilege would impact her study and viewed her whiteness as "a property of the situation or interaction to play, not merely a trait" (Goffman, 2014, p. 232). Her whiteness was a source of concern in her work, which she likely realized before entering the sixth block. 

While reading the book, I feel that it straddles the line between journalism and ethnography, as Goffman (2014) didn’t involve too much theoretical background in her work. She wrote about people as if they were the news, character-centered and sensational-sounding. However, this approach raises major dilemmas in depicting ghetto ethnography. By portraying individual delinquency sympathetically, the researcher hopes to criticize the larger context and system, yet some may view the fantasy jungle style as magnifying individual experiences and promoting delinquency. This realization has made me more cautious for future field research, maintaining a balance of distance both in and out of the field. In this sense, Goffman's complete immersion is all the more impressive for a researcher.

## References

Foucault, M. (1979). *Discipline and punish.* Vintage.

Garland, D. (2001). Introduction: The meaning of mass imprisonment. In D. Garland (Ed.), *Mass imprisonment: Social causes and consequences* (pp. 1–3). Sage Publications.

Goffman, A. (2009). On the run: Wanted men in a Philadelphia ghetto. *American Sociological Review, 74*(3), 339–357.

Goffman, A. (2014). *On the run: Fugitive life in an American city.* The University of Chicago Press.

Littlejohn, S., Foss, K., & Oetzel, J. (2017). Society. In S. Littlejohn, K. Foss, & J. Oetzel (Eds.), *Theories of human communication* (11th ed., pp. 429–476). Waveland Press. 

Kurtz, L. R. (1984). *Evaluating Chicago sociology: A guide to the literature, with an annotated bibliography.* The University of Chicago Press.

The Pew Center. (2008). *One in 100: Behind bars in America 2008.* The Pew Charitable Trusts. 
